---
layout: post
author: ΔΨφ
permalink: /2021-05-29-Fundamental-Forces-of-Nature.md/
---
As promised, I give you my next article in the standard model series!! This article will be about the fundamental interactions that take place and is extremely important in order to understand particle physics.

**Forces** or **interactions** are necessary for any change that takes place. From preventing atoms from collapsing to stabilising a star through fusion reactions, everything is a consequence of interactions between particles. In order for two particles to interact with each other there must be some “driving” or “mediating” particle that carries out the interaction. Such mediating particles are known as force carriers or **bosons**. It is interesting to note that these particles are **virtual particles** they are transitory quantum fluctuations i.e. exist only for a very short duration of time (during which the interaction takes place). The closer their characteristics come to real particles, the longer they exist. Also they always conserve energy. And as far as quantum numbers go, different quantum numbers are conserved depending upon the interactions or the exchanged bosons. One important tool we use for representing interactions is the **Feynman Diagram**.

Certain conventions are followed while making these diagrams. A Feynman diagram consists of an incoming fermionic line, an outgoing fermionic line, two vertices and a propagator connecting these two vertices. The propagator may be bosonic or fermionic, if it is bosonic then it’s represented by a wiggly line and if it is fermionic then it’s represented by a straight line. Time can be considered to be moving either upwards or from left to right. These Feynman diagrams though look very simple, are representations of all possible ways that a particle can follow to undergo a specific interaction. Any one such Feynman diagram is one possible way and represents a term in the Wick’s Expansion.

Any interaction can be classified into 4 basic or fundamental interactions. Fundamental forces or interactions are the basic forces which cannot be broken down further into simpler forces. At present there are 4 such forces : The Strong Nuclear Force, The Electromagnetic Force, The Weak Nuclear Force and finally the Force of Gravity.

Since these topics are a bit long; therefore, I have decided to make the rest of this article about Quantum Chromodynamics and the next article about Quantum Electrodynamics.

**The Strong Nuclear Force** is the strongest of the four forces. The boson for this interaction is the **Gluon (g)**. This interaction makes up all matter as we know it. Quarks interact with each other through the strong force and this force confines the quarks to their bound state which results in the formation of all hadrons which make up the atoms that are the building blocks of everything from carbon molecules to high rise buildings. Now you may wonder why only quarks interact with the strong force. Well for starters quarks and gluons are the only particles which do not have a vanishing colour charge. Colour charge is analogous to the electromagnetic charge we see on protons, electrons, etc. While we have + and – in electromagnetic charge, in colour charge we have ±red, ±green and ±blue. Gluons have two colour charges for example red and anti-green. Gluons can exist in a total of eight independent color states also know as the octet of gluons, the states are: